# Decision-making and Recommendation Process for Governance Advisory Committee

**Agenda for Decision-Making:** The Governance Advisory Committee (Committee) will review and discuss the executive report shared by the executive directors or other members of the executive team during each committee meeting. Additional agenda points can be proposed by the executive team or Committee and shared through exclusive channels (Slack and Email) for the Committee at least one week before each meeting, and may be updated until the day before. The executive leadership team will communicate if a decision or recommendation regarding any matter needs to be made before, during, or after the meeting.

**Voting/Recommendation Platform:** Voting will take place via GitHub issue, where each Committee member will be invited to comment and indicate their preference using the following options: "Agree", "Disagree", "Abstain", or request further clarification. This will often occur through comments and [using “emoji” reactions on a GitHub issue](https://github.blog/news-insights/product-news/add-reactions-to-pull-requests-issues-and-comments/). Recommendations on any matter discussed with the Committee will also be made via GitHub issues.

**Modalities:** To encourage active participation and input within the Committee, two modes will be available for decision-making and recommendation: 1) **Synchronously:** During committee meetings, where notes can be live-recorded on the issue, and 2) **Asynchronously:** Through engagement on the GitHub issue.
Anonymity is not supported in either mode. For anonymous feedback, the Committee can contact the Executive Leadership team via email or Slack, addressing either the entire team or a specific member.

**Types of Voting:** Active members can express their position on a GitHub issue by commenting with "Agree," "Disagree," or "Abstain" regarding the presented initiative. Members who "Disagree" or "Abstain" must provide a written justification (in a comment) to help improve the resources, initiative, or other discussion points. This enables the Committee to reach collective decisions or formulate recommendations for the executive team to consider.

**Informed Voting:** The Committee will discuss and address each agenda item, providing an opportunity for all perspectives to be heard and expressed. The proposed modalities will allow for consideration of both supporting and opposing arguments before concluding the decision-making and recommendation process within the designated timeframe.

**Committee’s Decision-Making:** Decisions will require approval by at least a two-thirds affirmative vote of active Committee members. It is crucial to understand that the Committee's decision-making process allows them to make recommendations, while the OLS Board of Directors retains final responsibility for actions affecting the organisation's activities.

**Tied Votes:** In the event of an indecisive voting outcome from the Governance Advisory Committee's voting process, the OLS Executive Leadership will be responsible for resolving the issue by either casting a vote between the tied options or assessing additional inputs from the OLS staff and community.

**Red Flags:** As a remedy in exceptional situations where active Committee members believe that the issues addressed or submitted to vote do not or may not comply with OLS’s goals or values, they can activate this mechanism. To do so, they must contact the full Committee via Slack or Email within 5 working days. The issue must then be discussed again asynchronously, in a scheduled meeting, or in an extraordinary meeting.

**Involving the Community in Decision-Making:** Decisions and recommendations on matters affecting the entire community should be open for community discussion before final approval. In such cases, a dedicated GitHub issue will be created, describing the matter, sharing relevant resources, and outlining a process for community members to express their concerns, feedback, and recommendations. The voting process and timeline will be explicitly announced via an OLS blog post, cross-posted to the OLS community Slack channel.

**Timeframe:** For each request requiring community voting or recommendations, a timeframe of at least 5 days and at most 8 weeks will be provided after the Committee approves the community engagement plan for that decision.

**Transparency Report:** The Committee will regularly develop and publish a transparency report to publicly record key discussions, organisational decisions, and recommendations made for executive leadership and/or community review. This report will be shared via a public repository and the OLS website. Subsequent reports may include follow-ups on previously reported outcomes, such as how recommendations were integrated into the organisation's work.
